1. Interviews form the basic criteria for most large companies. However, some people think that the interview is not a reliable method of choosing whom to employ and there are other better methods. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
2. Businesses always aim to make more sales. What are some of the methods to do this? Which one is the best method?  
3. The increase in the production of consumer consumption goods results in damage to the natural environment. What are the causes of this and what can be done to solve this problem?  
4. If a product is good or it meets people's needs, people will buy it so advertising is unnecessary and no more than entertainment. Do you agree or disagree with the statement?  
5. Children find it difficult to concentrate on or pay attention to their studies in school. What are the reasons? How can we solve this problem?  
6. Some experts believe that when a country is already rich, any additional increase in economic wealth does not make its citizens any more satisfied. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
7. Some school leavers travel or work for a period of time instead going directly to university. What are the advantages and disadvantages.  
8. Pollution and other environmental damage are caused by a country developing and becoming richer. This problem cannot be avoided. To what extent do you agree?  
9. Accommodation and transport problems are increasing in many large cities. Businesses are encouraged to move to rural areas. Do the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?  
10. People are becoming dependent on the Internet and phone. Do the benefits of this outweigh the disadvantages.  
11. Mobile phone and the internet could have many benefits for old people. However, this age group uses technology the least. What are the benefits for old people of using mobile phones and the internet? How can we encourage them to use this new technology?  
12. Nowadays more and more people want to get things done instantly (services, information, tasks). Why is this? Do you think this is a positive or negative development?  
13. Restoration of old buildings in main cities involves enormous government expenditure. It would be more beneficial to spend this money to build new houses and roads. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
14. Some people think that instead of preventing climate change, we need to find a way to live with it. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
15. Money should be spent on creating new public buildings such as museums or town halls rather than renovating the existing ones. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
16. Some people think the money spent on developing the technology for space exploration is not justified. There are more beneficial ways to spend this money. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
17. Some people believe that they should be able to keep all the money they earn, and should not have to pay tax to the state. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
18. Consumers are faced with increasing numbers of advertisements from competing companies. To what extent do you think consumers are influenced by advertisements? What measures can be taken to protect them?  
19. Many countries are spending a huge amount of money on supporting their competitors to take part in some worldwide competitions. Other argue that it would be better if these countries can spend money on the children to take part in sports. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
20. Some people believe that it is the government's responsibility to provide care and financial to support people after they retire. Others, however, think that individuals themselves saving money in their own care when they are old. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
21. Money offered for past-graduated research is limited. As a consequence, some people argue that financial support from the government should only be provided for scientific research rather than research for less useful subjects.  
22. Some people think watching TV is bad for children in every way. Other think TV has positive effects on children, as they develop to grow up. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
23. Nowadays, celebrities are more famous for their glamour and wealth than for their achievements, and this sets a bad example to young people. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
24. Some think that governments should support retired people financially while others believe they should take care of themselves. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
25. Some countries have an ever-increasing proportion of population who are aged 15 and younger. What is your opinion of the current and future effects it may have in those countries?  
26. A lot of old people are suffering from loneliness these days. They also lack physical fitness. What do you think are the reasons for this problem? Can you think of possible solutions?  
27. Some think most crime is the result of circumstances, e.g., poverty and other social problems. Others believe that most crime is caused by people who are bad by nature. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
28. Directors of organizations receive higher salaries than the ordinary worker. Some people think it is necessary while others think it is unfair. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
29. Some people believe that scientists have more influence over the world whereas others argue that politician have more influence over the world. Discuss both the views and give your opinion.  
30. As housing is a basic need for people, the government should provide free housing for everyone who can’t afford it. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
31. The shortage of housing in big cities can cause severe consequences. Only governments actions can solve this problem. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
32. Many people believe that the current system of both teachers and students in the classroom will no longer exist by the year 2050. To what extent do you agree with this opinion?  
33. Some people believe that studying at university or college is the best route to a successful career, while others believe that it is better to get a job straight after school. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
34. Education of young people is highly prioritized in many countries. However, educating adults who cannot write or read is even more important and governments should spend more money on this. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
35. Education for young people is important in many countries. However, some people think that the government should spend more money on education in adult populations who cannot read and write. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
36. Some people believe that governments should make laws about people’s nutrition and food choice while others argue that it is their choice. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
37. Nowadays more and more people want to get things done instantly (services, information, tasks). Why is this? Do you think this is a positive or negative development?  
38. It is important for all towns and cities to have large public spaces such as squares and parks. Do you agree or disagree with this statement?  
39. Some people think that it is a waste of money for countries to host big sporting events like the world cup, and that the money would be better spent on other things. However, others think that hosting large sporting events has a clear, positive impact on a country. Discuss both these views and give your opinion.  
40. Every day, millions of tons of food are wasted all over the world. Why do you think this is happening? And how can we solve this problem?  
41. Some employers believe that job applicants’ social skills are more important than their academic qualifications. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
42. It is the responsibility of schools to teach children good behavior in addition to provide formal education. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
43. Some believe that younger family members should be legally responsible for supporting older family members when they become physically, mentally and financially unable to look after themselves. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
44. In many countries, governments spend large sums of money on the arts and this is supported by some taxpayers as worthwhile. Others, however, think that this money would be better spent on health and education. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
45. Scientists tell us that some activities are good for health and others are bad. Despite knowing that, millions of people still continue doing unhealthy activities. What are the causes and what are the solutions for this?  
46. Some people believe that the main benefit of international cooperation is the protection of the environment, while others think that the main benefits are in the world of business. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
47. Historical objects should be brought back to their country of origin. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
48. In some countries, ordinary citizens are allowed to keep a gun in their house. Some people think this is a good idea, while others disagree. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
49. Parents should encourage children to spend less time on studying and more time on doing physical activities. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
50. Some people say that increasing business and cultural contacts between countries is a positive development, while others think that many countries will lose their national identities as a result. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
51. Some believe technology has made our lives too complex and the solution is to lead a simpler life without technology. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
52. Some people think that children should be taught at school to recycle materials and avoid waste. Other people believe that children should be taught this at home. Discuss both opinions and give your own opinion.  
53. The shortage of housing in big cities can cause severe consequences. Only government action can solve this problem. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
54. Some people think the money spent on developing the technology for space exploration is not justified. There are more beneficial ways to spend this money. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
55. More people decided to have children in their later age than in the past. Why? Do advantages of this outweigh disadvantages?  
56. Some people believe that it is the government’s responsibility to provide care and finance to support people after they retire. Others, however, think that individuals themselves should save money in their own when they are old. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
57. Some people believe that watching television is bad for children. Other people believe that watching television is educational for children. Which opinion do you agree with and why?  
58. Some people think the developments of technology make people's life more complex, so we should make life simpler without using technology. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
59. More and more people are becoming seriously overweight. Some people say that the price increase of fattening foods will solve this problem. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
60. Some people say that when deciding how taxes should be spent, governments should prioritise health care. Other people believe that there are more important priorities for taxpayers' money. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.  
61. Many students find it difficult to focus or pay attention at school nowadays. What are the reasons for this? What can be done to solve this problem?  
62. Many people use social media every day to get in touch with others and news events. Do you think the advantages of this outweigh the disadvantages?  
63. Many people today are choosing to travel to other countries. Why is this happening? Is this a positive or negative development?  
64. Some people believe that time spent on television, video and computer games can be valuable for children. Others believe this may have negative effects on a child's development. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.  
65. Some people think that employers should not care about the way their employees dress, because what matters is the quality of their work. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
66. Some people argue that we should do research into their family history. Others agree with the view that we should focus on the present and future generations. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
67. Some people think that charity organizations should only offer help to people of their own country. But others believe that these organizations should give aid to people in great need wherever they live. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
68. Many different countries have most shops and products as the same. Some consider it a positive development, whereas others consider it negative. Discuss both sides and give your opinion.  
69. Some people think news has no connection to people’s lives, so it is a waste of time to read news in the newspaper and watch news programs on television. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
70. In some cities, people are choosing cars instead of bicycles, while in other cities riding bikes is replacing cars. Why is this the case? Which development do you think is better?  
71. Some people think that the government should provide assistance to all kinds of artists including painters, musicians and poets. However, other people think that this is a waste of money. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
72. In some countries, celebrities complain about the way the media publicizes their private lives. Some people say that they should accept it as part of their fame. Do you agree or disagree?  
73. Some people think that the government should ensure the healthy lifestyle of people, but others argue that it should be decided by individuals. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
74. The best way to reduce poverty in developing countries is by giving up to six years of free education, so that they can at least read, write and use numbers. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
75. The best way to keep road transport safe is to make vehicle drivers have a driving test each year. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
76. Although families have influence on children’s development, factors outside the home play a bigger part in their lives nowadays. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
77. Large companies use sports events to promote their products. Some people think it has a negative impact on sports. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
78. Some people think that newspapers are the best way to get news. However, others believe that they can get news better through other media platforms. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
79. Young people are often influenced in their behaviours and situations by others in the same age. This is called “peer pressure”. Do the disadvantages of peer pressure outweigh the advantages?  
80. Newspapers have influenced people's ideas and opinions. What are the reasons for this? Is this a positive or a negative situation?  
81. As housing is a basic need for people, the government should provide free housing for everyone who cannot afford it. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
82. Young people are often influenced in their behaviours and situations by others of the same age. This is called “peer pressure”. Do the disadvantages of peer pressure outweigh the advantages?  
83. In some countries, celebrities complain about the way the media publicize their private lives. Some people say that they should accept it as part of their fame. Do you agree or disagree?  
84. Schools should focus on academic success and passing examinations. Skills such as cookery, dressmaking and woodworking should not be taught at school as it is better to learn these from family and friends. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
85. Some people think that governments should change the way individuals live, while others believe they should choose the way themselves. Discuss both points of view and give your opinion.  
86. More people than ever travel to other countries. Why is this the case? Is this a positive or negative development?  
87. Some people think that it is better for older schoolchildren to study a large number of subjects and develop a wide range of knowledge. Others argue that they should study a smaller number of subjects and focus on details. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
88. Some people think that robots are important for human’s future development. Others think that robots have negative effects on society. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
89. The best way for a country to prepare for the future is to invest more resources in its young people. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this opinion?  
90. Children find it difficult to concentrate on or pay attention to their studies in school. What are the reasons? How can we solve this problem?  
91. Some school leavers travel or work for a period of time instead of going directly to university. What are the advantages and disadvantages?  
92. Government spends a lot of money on education. More money should be spent on free time activities. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
93. In recent years, responsible tourists have paid attention to preserving both the culture and environment of the places they visit. However, some people say that it is impossible to be a responsible tourist. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
94. Many customs and traditional ways of behavior are no longer relevant to modern life and not worth keeping. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
95. There is no need to go out to see live performances (concerts, etc.) because it is better to see them on TV or computer screens. Do you agree or disagree?  
96. The international community must act immediately to ensure all nations reduce their consumption of fossil fuels (e.g., gas and oil). To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
97. In many countries, more and more people are competing for a place to study in universities. Why does this happen? Do you think this is a positive or negative development?  
98. In cities and towns all over the world, the high volume of traffic is a problem. What are the causes of this and what actions can be taken to solve this problem?  
99. Most of the urgent problems can only be solved with international cooperation. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
100. Some people think parents should read or tell stories to children. Others think parents need not do that as children can read books or watch TV or movies by themselves. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
101. Some people think that newspapers are the best way to learn about the news. However, others believe that they can learn the news more effectively through other media. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
102. Some people think that museums should be enjoyable places to entertain people, while others believe that the purpose of museums is to educate. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
103. It is predicted that with the development of technology, people in the 21st century have much more free time. To what extent has the prediction come true? Give reasons from your perspective and experience.  
104. Many students find it harder to study when they are at university or college than when they were at school. Why is this? What can be done to solve the problem?  
105. In some countries, there has been an increase in the number of parents who educate their children themselves at home instead of sending them to school. Do you think the advantages of this outweigh the disadvantages?  
106. The typical teaching situation of a teacher and students in the class will not exist by the year 2050. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
107. Today, people in many countries have to spend more and more time away from their families. Why is this happening? What effects does this have on the people themselves and on their families?  
108. It is important for all towns and cities to have large public spaces such as squares and parks. Do you agree or disagree with this statement?  
109. Some universities offer online courses as an alternative to classes delivered on campus. Do you think this is a positive or negative development?  
110. It is more important to spend public money on promoting a healthy lifestyle in order to prevent illness than to spend it on treatment of people who are already ill. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
111. Today, people are surrounded by advertising. This affects what people think is important and has a negative impact on people's lives. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
112. With the growing population in cities, more and more people live in homes with small or no outdoor areas. Is this a positive or negative development?  
113. People nowadays tend to have children at older ages. Do the advantages of this outweigh the disadvantages?  
114. Many people think modern communication technology is having some negative effects on social relationships. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
115. The best way to teach children to cooperate is through team sports at school. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
116. News media is important in our society. Why is it so important? Do you think its influence is generally positive or negative?  
117. In today’s world, people spend a lot of money on appearance because they want to look younger. Why does this happen? Do you think this is a positive or negative development?  
118. In many countries, imprisonment is the most common solution to crimes. However, some people believe that better education will be a more effective solution. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
119. Some children nowadays take sports seriously while others play sports in their free time. Is this a positive or negative development?  
120. Some people argue that governments should make laws regarding people’s nutrition and food choices to improve public health, while others contend that this is the freedom of personal choice and responsibility. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
121. Some people believe that the main purpose of schools is to turn children into good citizens and workers instead of benefiting them individually. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
122. The increase in the production of consumer goods results in damage to the natural environment. What are the causes of this? What can be done to solve this problem?  
123. Some people think that instead of preventing climate change, we need to find a way to live with it. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
124. Money should be spent on creating new public buildings such as museums or town halls rather than renovating the existing ones. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
125. Some people believe that they should be able to keep all the money they earn and should not have to pay tax to the state. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
126. Consumers are faced with increasing numbers of advertisements from competing companies. To what extent do you think consumers are influenced by advertisements? What measures can be taken to protect them?  
127. Many countries are spending a huge amount of money on supporting their competitors to take part in some worldwide sports competitions. Others argue that it would be better if these countries spent the money on children to take part in sports. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
128. Some people believe that the government should take care of older people and provide financial support after they retire. Others say individuals should save during their working years to fund their own retirement. What is your opinion?  
129. Nowadays celebrities are more famous for their glamour and wealth than for their achievements, and this sets a bad example to young people. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement?  
130. Housing shortages in big cities can cause severe social consequences. Some people think only government action can solve this problem. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
131. Some people believe that studying at university or college is the best route to a successful career, while others believe that it is better to get a job straight after school. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
132. Education of young people is highly prioritized in many countries. However, educating adults who cannot write or read is even more important, and governments should spend more money on this. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
133. Some people think that technology makes life complex, so we should make our life simpler without using technology. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
134. More and more people are becoming seriously overweight. Some people say that increasing the price of fattening foods will solve this problem. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
135. Some people use social media to keep in touch with other people and news events. Do you think the advantages of this technology outweigh the disadvantages?  
136. Some people believe that what children watch on television influences their behavior. Others say that the amount of time spent watching television influences their behavior. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
137. Some people think that employers should not care about the way their employees dress, because what matters is the quality of their work. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
138. Some people think that charity organizations should only offer help to people of their own country. But others believe that these organizations should give aid to people in great need wherever they live. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
139. Some people think news has no connection to people’s lives, so it is a waste of time to read the news in newspapers and watch television news programs. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
140. In some cities, people are choosing cars instead of bicycles, while in other cities riding bikes is replacing cars. Why is this the case? Which development do you think is better?  
141. Some people think that the government should provide assistance to all kinds of artists, including painters, musicians and poets. However, other people think that this is a waste of money. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
142. Young people who commit crimes should be treated in the same way as adults who commit crimes. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
143. In many countries, more and more young people are leaving school and unable to find jobs after graduation. What problems do you think youth unemployment will cause to the individual and society? Give reasons and make some suggestions.  
144. Some believe that people are naturally born as leaders while others feel that leadership skills can develop. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
145. Every day, millions of tons of food are wasted all over the world. Why do you think this is happening? And how can we solve this problem?  
146. Some people think the best way to solve global environmental problems is to increase the cost of fuel. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
147. The range of technology available to people is increasing the gap between the rich and the poor. Others think it has an opposite effect. Discuss both views and give your opinions.  
148. Some people think robots can improve human life in future, while others think robots may affect society in a bad way. Discuss both viewpoints and give your opinion.  
149. Some people think that increasing business and cultural contacts worldwide have positive influences on development; others think that they have negative effects on national identities. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
150. Some people say that fashion affects our lives in a negative way. However, others say that it has more positive effects on our lives. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
151. Some people think that children should not watch television because it has negative effects, while others believe that television helps children. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
152. While some people consider air pollution to be the most dangerous environmental problem, others believe that soil pollution has a more serious effect on our world. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
153. Some people believe that celebrities have a positive effect on society, while others think that their effect is harmful and negative. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
154. Some people think that giving aid to poor countries has positive effect, while others believe that international aid should be stopped. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.  
155. Some people believe that climate has the greatest effect on people's way of life. Others believe that the economy of the region has the greatest effect. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
156. Some people think that competitive sports have a positive effect on the education of teenagers while others argue that the effect is negative. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.  
157. Some people think that watching TV is bad for children, while others think that watching TV has more beneficial effects on children. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
158. Films and computer games containing violence are popular. Some people say they have negative effects on society and should be banned. Others say they are just harmless relaxation. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
159. Some people say that advertising has positive economic effects. Others think it has negative social effects because it will make people feel dissatisfied with who they are and what they have. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
160. Some people think that climate change could have a negative effect on business. Other people think that climate change could create more business opportunities. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
161. Holding international games such as the Olympic Games is an exciting event. Some people think that it has positive effects while others argue that it is a waste of money. Discuss both sides and give your own opinion.  
162. Some people say that playing computer games is bad for children in every aspect. Others say that playing computer games can have positive effects on the way children develop. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
163. Some people believe that zoos have a positive impact on conservation efforts and education. Others argue that keeping animals in captivity is cruel and goes against their natural instincts. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
164. Some people believe that schools should include competitive sports as a subject while others believe that it has negative effects on children. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
165. Many people believe that modern music can have a negative impact on the young. Others believe the effect of modern music is positive. Discuss both these views and give your opinion.  
166. Nowadays families move to different countries for work. Some people think it has a negative effect on children, while others disagree. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
167. Some people believe that violence on television and in computer games has a damaging effect on society. Others deny that these have any significant influence on people's behaviour. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
168. Some people think that there are benefits in going to private secondary schools. Others feel that private schools can have negative effects on the society. Discuss both the views and give your opinion.  
169. Some people believe that time spent on television, video and computer games can be beneficial to children. Others believe this has negative effects on a child. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
170. Some believe that people should make efforts to fight climate change while others think it is better to learn to live with it. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
171. It is common for people to travel long distances for work and study. Some argue that longer commute times affect people in a negative way while others disagree. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
172. Some people think that illegal Internet downloads are having a negative effect on the music industry. Others feel that they have little or no impact on artists. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
173. Some people think that students benefit from going to private secondary schools. Others, however, feel that private secondary schools can have a negative effect on society as a whole. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.  
174. Some people are of the view that students should keep a gap of one year without study between school and university. While others think it affects learning. Discuss both viewpoints and give your opinion by giving relevant reasons and examples.  
175. Human activities have negative effects on plants and animals all over the world. Some people think it is too late to do something about it. Others think there is still some time to take actions. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
176. Some people think that families have the most powerful influence on a child’s development, while others think other factors such as television, friends, music, etc. have the biggest effects. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
177. Some people think that the best way to improve public health is by increasing the number of sports facilities. Others think that this has little effect and other measures are required. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
178. Some people think that the main benefit of international cooperation is in the protection of the environment, while others think that the main benefits are in the world business. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
179. Most of the urgent problems can only be solved with international cooperation. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
180. Many countries are spending a huge amount of money on supporting their competitors to take part in some worldwide competitions. Others argue that it would be better if these countries can spend money on children to take part in sports. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
181. In the past, people stored knowledge in books. Nowadays people store knowledge on the internet. Do you think the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?  
182. More and more people decide to eat healthy food and exercise regularly. What are the reasons for this trend? What can be done to encourage more people to eat healthier and exercise?  
183. Some people think that too much attention and too many resources are given to the protection of wild animals and birds. Do you agree or disagree?  
184. Leaders and directors in organizations are normally older people. Some people think having a younger leader would be better. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
185. Some people think scientific research should focus on solving world health problems. Others think that there are more important issues. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
186. Fewer young people choose to work in farming. What are the reasons? Should young people be encouraged to do farming work?  
187. Machines are replacing humans in the manual workforce. Do you think the positive effects outweigh the negative effects?  
188. The expansion of multinational companies and increase in globalization produces positive effects to everyone. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement?  
189. It is argued that the parents of children who break the rules should be punished in some ways as parents are responsible for the children's actions. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
190. In recent times economic growth has made some people richer in both developed and developing countries. While studies show that people in developing countries are happier now than before, people in developed countries are no happier than they were before. Why do you think this is and what lessons can be learned from it?  
191. The only way to improve safety on our roads is to give much stricter punishments for driving offences. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
192. Some people think that young people should be required to do unpaid work helping people in the community. Do the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?  
193. Any country should be able to sell goods to other countries without the restrictions of the government. Do you agree or disagree?  
194. Men and women are different in terms of their characteristics and abilities. For this reason, some jobs are better done by men and others by women. Do you agree or disagree?  
195. Some people believe that eventually all jobs will be done by artificially intelligent robots. What is your opinion?  
196. Many university graduates cannot find a job in their chosen profession. What factors may have caused this situation and what, in your opinion, should be done about it?  
197. Many people have jobs that involve working shifts (i.e. working at night). What are some of the problems that shift workers might face? What can be done to solve them?  
198. The increase in the production of consumer goods results in damage to the natural environment. What is the cause of this? What can be done to solve this problem?  
199. Many people argue that in order to improve educational quality, high school students should be encouraged to question and offer criticisms on their teachers. Others think this will lead to a loss of respect and discipline in the classroom. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
200. Some people think in order to continually improve the quality of education, high school students should be encouraged to evaluate and criticize their teachers. Others feel that this would result in a loss of respect and discipline in the classroom. Discuss both these views and give your opinion.  
201. Some people think the main benefit of international cooperation is in the protection of the environment, while others think that the main benefits are in the world business. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
202. Most of the urgent problems can only be solved with international cooperation. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
203. Many countries are spending a huge amount of money on supporting their competitors to take part in some worldwide competitions. Others argue that it would be better if these countries can spend money on the children to take part in sports. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
204. In the past, people stored knowledge in books. Nowadays people store knowledge on the internet. Do you think the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?  
205. More and more people decide to eat healthy food and exercise regularly. What are the reasons for this trend? What can be done to encourage more people to eat healthier and exercise?  
206. Some people think that too much attention and too many resources are given to the protection of wild animals and birds. Do you agree or disagree?  
207. Leaders and directors in organizations are normally older people. Some people think having a younger leader would be better. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
208. Some people think scientific research should focus on solving world health problems. Others think that there are more important issues. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
209. Fewer young people choose to work in farming. What are the reasons? Should young people be encouraged to do farming work?  
210. Machines are replacing humans in the manual workforce. Do you think the positive effects outweigh the negative effects?  
211. The expansion of multinational companies and increase in globalization produce positive effects to everyone. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement?  
212. It is argued that the parents of children who break the rules should be punished in some ways as parents are responsible for the children's actions. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
213. In recent time economic growth has made some people richer in both developed and developing countries. While studies show that people in developing countries are happier now than before, people in developed countries are no happier than they were before. Why do you think this is and what lessons can be learned from it?  
214. The only way to improve safety on our roads is to give much stricter punishments for driving offences. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
215. Some people think that young people should be required to do unpaid work helping people in the community. Do the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?  
216. Any country should be able to sell goods to other countries without the restrictions of the government. Do you agree or disagree?  
217. Employees should not work in jobs they don’t enjoy. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
218. Men and women are different in terms of their characteristics and abilities. For this reason, some jobs are better done by men and others by women. Do you agree or disagree?  
219. Some people believe that eventually all jobs will be done by artificially intelligent robots. What is your opinion?  
220. Many university graduates cannot find a job in their chosen profession. What factors may have caused this situation and what, in your opinion, should be done about it?  
221. Many people have jobs that involve working shifts (i.e. working at night). What are some of the problems that shift workers might face? What can be done to solve them?  
222. The increase in the production of consumer goods results in damage to the natural environment. What is the cause of this? What can be done to solve this problem?  
223. Many people argue that in order to improve educational quality, high school students should be encouraged to question and offer criticisms on their teachers. Others think this will lead to a loss of respect and discipline in the classroom. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
224. Some people think in order to continually improve the quality of education, high school students should be encouraged to evaluate and criticize their teachers. Others feel that this would result in a loss of respect and discipline in the classroom. Discuss both these views and give your opinion.  
225. Some people think that the main benefit of international cooperation is in the protection of the environment, while others think that the main benefits are in the world business. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
226. Most of the urgent problems can only be solved with international cooperation. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
227. Many countries are spending a huge amount of money on supporting their competitors to take part in some worldwide competitions. Others argue that it would be better if these countries can spend money on the children to take part in sports. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
228. In the past, people stored knowledge in books. Nowadays people store knowledge on the internet. Do you think the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?  
229. More and more people decide to eat healthy food and exercise regularly. What are the reasons for this trend? What can be done to encourage more people to eat healthier and exercise?  
230. Some people think that too much attention and too many resources are given to the protection of wild animals and birds. Do you agree or disagree?  
231. Leaders and directors in organizations are normally older people. Some people think having a younger leader would be better. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
232. Some people think scientific research should focus on solving world health problems. Others think that there are more important issues. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
233. Fewer young people choose to work in farming. What are the reasons? Should young people be encouraged to do farming work?  
234. Machines are replacing humans in the manual workforce. Do you think the positive effects outweigh the negative effects?  
235. The expansion of multinational companies and increase in globalization produce positive effects to everyone. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement?  
236. It is argued that the parents of children who break the rules should be punished in some ways as parents are responsible for the children's actions. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
237. In recent time economic growth has made some people richer in both developed and developing countries. While studies show that people in developing countries are happier now than before, people in developed countries are no happier than they were before. Why do you think this is and what lessons can be learned from it?  
238. The only way to improve safety on our roads is to give much stricter punishments for driving offences. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
239. Some people think that young people should be required to do unpaid work helping people in the community. Do the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?  
240. Any country should be able to sell goods to other countries without the restrictions of the government. Do you agree or disagree?  
241. Employees should not work in jobs they don’t enjoy. To what extent do you agree or disagree?  
242. Men and women are different in terms of their characteristics and abilities. For this reason, some jobs are better done by men and others by women. Do you agree or disagree?  
243. Some people believe that eventually all jobs will be done by artificially intelligent robots. What is your opinion?  
244. Many university graduates cannot find a job in their chosen profession. What factors may have caused this situation and what, in your opinion, should be done about it?  
245. Many people have jobs that involve working shifts (i.e. working at night). What are some of the problems that shift workers might face? What can be done to solve them?  
246. The increase in the production of consumer goods results in damage to the natural environment. What is the cause of this? What can be done to solve this problem?  
247. Many people argue that in order to improve educational quality, high school students should be encouraged to question and offer criticisms on their teachers. Others think this will lead to a loss of respect and discipline in the classroom. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.  
248. Some people think in order to continually improve the quality of education, high school students should be encouraged to evaluate and criticize their teachers. Others feel that this would result in a loss of respect and discipline in the classroom. Discuss both these views and give your opinion.  
249. Some people think that the main benefit of international cooperation is in the protection of the environment, while others think that the main benefits are in the world business. Discuss both views and give your opinion.  
250. Most of the urgent problems can only be solved with international cooperation. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
251. Many countries are spending a huge amount of money on supporting their competitors to take part in some worldwide competitions. Others argue that it would be better if these countries can spend money on the children to take part in sports. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
252. In the past, people stored knowledge in books. Nowadays people store knowledge on the internet. Do you think the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?
253. More and more people decide to eat healthy food and exercise regularly. What are the reasons for this trend? What can be done to encourage more people to eat healthier and exercise?
254. Some people think that too much attention and too many resources are given to the protection of wild animals and birds. Do you agree or disagree?
255. Leaders and directors in organizations are normally older people. Some people think having a younger leader would be better. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
256. Some people think scientific research should focus on solving world health problems. Others think that there are more important issues. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
257. Fewer young people choose to work in farming. What are the reasons? Should young people be encouraged to do farming work?
258. Machines are replacing humans in the manual workforce. Do you think the positive effects outweigh the negative effects?
259. The expansion of multinational companies and increase in globalization produce positive effects to everyone. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement?
260. It is argued that the parents of children who break the rules should be punished in some ways as parents are responsible for the children's actions. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
261. In recent time economic growth has made some people richer in both developed and developing countries. While studies show that people in developing countries are happier now than before, people in developed countries are no happier than they were before. Why do you think this is and what lessons can be learned from it?
262. The only way to improve safety on our roads is to give much stricter punishments for driving offences. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
263. Some people think that young people should be required to do unpaid work helping people in the community. Do the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?
264. Any country should be able to sell goods to other countries without the restrictions of the government. Do you agree or disagree?
265. Employees should not work in jobs they don’t enjoy. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
266. Men and women are different in terms of their characteristics and abilities. For this reason, some jobs are better done by men and others by women. Do you agree or disagree?
267. Some people believe that eventually all jobs will be done by artificially intelligent robots. What is your opinion?
268. In many places women are taking jobs which are traditionally done by men. What do you think made these changes happen? What’s your opinion about it?
269. Many university graduates cannot find a job in their chosen profession. What factors may have caused this situation and what in your opinion should be done about it?
270. Many jobs used to be done by hand, but nowadays an increasing number of them are done using machines instead. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of this development.
271. Surveys show that many people believe most jobs in the future will be done at home. Do you agree or disagree?
272. Nowadays more and more jobs and tasks are done by machines which involve hard physical work. Do the positive effects of this trend outweigh the negative effects?
273. Many people have jobs that involve working shifts (i.e. working at night). What are some of the problems that shift workers might face? What can be done to solve them?
274. All jobs can be done equally well by a man and a woman. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
275. In some countries people encourage teenagers to find part-time jobs. Some people agree and others don’t. Review both sides and give your opinion.
276. As major cities in the world are growing today, so do their problems. What are the problems for young people who are living in the cities as the result of continued growth? What are the solutions for these problems?
277. Advertisements are becoming more and more common in everyday life. Is it a positive or negative development?
278. Whether or not someone achieves their aims is mostly by a question of luck. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
279. In many countries, most shops and products become identical. Some people think it is a positive development, while others believe it is a negative development. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.
280. Some people say that to prevent illness and disease, governments should focus more on reducing environmental pollution and housing problems. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
281. In some countries, more and more people are becoming interested in finding out about the history of the house or building they live in. What are the reasons for this? How can people research this?
282. Human activities have a negative effect on plant and animal species. Some people say that it is too late to do anything. Some people think that we should take effective action to improve the situation. Discuss both sides and give an opinion.
283. Nowadays people have cosmetic surgery to improve life. Why do many more people choose these operations? Do you think this is a positive or negative development?
284. Environmental damage is a problem in most countries. What factors damage the environment and who should take responsibility?
285. Some people think that secondary school children should study international news as one of the school subjects. Other people think that it is a waste of valuable school time. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
286. Some people think that art is an essential subject for children at school while others think it is a waste of time. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
287. Some people claim many things that children are taught at school are a waste of time. Other people argue that everything taught at school is useful at some time. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.
288. Some people think that children should be taught at school to recycle materials and avoid waste. Other people believe that children should be taught this at home. Discuss both opinions and give your own opinion.
289. Some people believe that children’s leisure activity must be educational otherwise they are a complete waste of time. Do you agree or disagree?
290. Some people believe that holidays are necessary for students, others think that children should not have holidays because it is just a waste of time. Do you agree or disagree?
291. Some people say that economic growth is the only way to end hunger and poverty, while others say that economic growth is damaging the environment so it must be stopped. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
292. Some people think increasing the cost of fuel is the best way to solve global environmental problems. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
293. The world has many towns and cities constructed in previous centuries that were more suitable and livable for people in those times than they are now. What problems will this cause today and what can be done to solve these problems?
294. Crimes committed by young people are increasing in major cities throughout the world. Discuss the causes and how to solve this problem.
295. Parents should encourage children to spend less time studying and more time doing physical activities. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
296. All fathers should be entitled to time-off from work when their children are born. What is your opinion?
297. Some people believe that the government should not spend money on international aid when they have their own disadvantaged people like homeless and unemployed. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
298. Some people believe that it is the government’s responsibility to provide care and finance to support people after they retire. Others, however, think that individuals themselves should save money for their own when they are old. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
299. Some people think that parents should tell stories or read to their children. However, others believe that these days this isn’t necessary as children have so many other sources for stories, such as books, films and TV. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
300. Some people think that the main purpose of school is to turn children into good citizens and workers, rather than to benefit them as individuals. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
301. Some people think that all teenagers should be required to do unpaid work in their free time to help the local community. They believe this would benefit both the individual teenager and society as a whole. Do you agree or disagree?
302. Companies use major sporting events to promote their products. Some people think it has a negative effect on sport in general. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
303. In some parts of the world, it is increasingly popular to research the history of one's own family. Why do people want to do this? Is it a positive or negative development?
304. Employers should give their staff at least a 4-week holiday a year to make employees better at their jobs. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
305. There are several factors that motivate people to stay in the workforce, and money is the most important reason/factor. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
306. Some scientists think that there are intelligent life forms on other planets and messages should be sent to contact them. Others think it is a bad idea and could be dangerous. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
307. In recent years, responsible tourists have paid attention to preserving both the culture and environment of the places they visit. However, some people say that it is impossible to be a responsible tourist. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
308. Many people believe that good planning is the key factor to success in life, while others believe that other factors like hard work or luck are more important. Discuss both views and give your opinion.
309. Research indicates that nowadays some consumers are much less influenced by advertising than in the past. What do you think are the reasons for this? Do you think this is a positive or negative development?
310. Some people think that museums should be enjoyable places to entertain people, while others believe that the purpose of museums is to educate. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.
311. In many parts of the world, children and teenagers are committing more crimes. Why is this happening? How should children or teenagers be punished?
312. In many parts of the world, people now often throw things away when they are broken and buy new ones, whereas in the past broken things were repaired and used again. Why do you think this is the case? What problems may it lead to?
313. As society changes, more and more people do not want to stay in one career or job. Many people change their careers and jobs. What is the cause of this phenomenon? Can you give some suggestions to solve this problem?
314. According to one survey, the life expectancy of people is increasing in developed countries. What problem will this cause for individuals and society?
315. In spite of the advances made in agriculture, many people around the world still go hungry. Why is this the case? What can be done about this problem?
316. In some cities, public parks and open spaces are changed into gardens where local residents can grow their own fruit and vegetables. Do you think the benefits outweigh the disadvantages?
317. As transport and accommodation problems are increasing in many cities, some governments are encouraging businesses to move to rural areas. Do you think the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?
318. Many people think that interviews are not the best way to assess the suitability of a candidate for a position. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
319. The use of social media, such as Facebook and Twitter, is replacing face-to-face contact with people. Do the advantages outweigh the disadvantages?
320. Some people believe that children that commit crimes should be punished. Others think the parents should be punished instead. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.
321. Detailed descriptions of crimes on newspaper and TV can have bad consequences on society, so this kind of information should be restricted in the media. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
322. More and more people these days work harder and longer hours and have no time for family life and friends. What are the causes in your opinion for this? How is it affecting family life and the society as a whole?
323. All fathers should be entitled to time-off from work when their children are born. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
324. In many countries today, parents are able to choose to send their children to single-sex schools or co-educational schools. Some people think that children going to single-sex schools have disadvantages later in life. To what extent do you agree?
325. In some countries, many people continue to live with or very near their parents even when they are married and have their own children. Does this situation have more advantages or more disadvantages?
326. In some countries, old people are choosing to live in retirement communities with other older people rather than living with their adult children. Is it a positive or a negative development?
327. In many countries, people have children later in life than in the past. What are the causes of this? Do the advantages of this outweigh the disadvantages?
328. Some people think that the best way to become successful in life is to get a university education, whereas others say this is no longer true. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.
329. Many studies have shown that most criminals have a low level of education. Some people say that to reduce the crime rate, criminals must be educated within prisons. It will improve their prospects of employment when they are released. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
330. Many employees may work at home with modern technology. Some people claim that it can benefit only the workers, not the employers. Do you agree or disagree?
331. The unlimited use of cars may cause many problems. What are those problems? In order to reduce this problem, should we discourage people to use cars?
332. The best way to solve the world's environmental problems is to increase the cost of fuel for cars and other vehicles. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
333. Directors of large organizations earn much higher salaries than ordinary employees do. Some people think it is necessary, but others hold that it is unfair. Discuss both views and give your own opinion.
334. Solving environmental problems should be the responsibility of one international organization rather than each national government. Do you agree or disagree?
335. As well as making money, businesses also have social responsibilities. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
336. Some people find advertisements amusing or annoying and they are not influenced by this when they shop. To what extent do you agree or disagree?
337. Nations should spend more money on skills and vocational training for practical work, rather than on university education. To what extent do you agree or disagree?